---
layout: post
title: Creating My First GAN! 
subtitle: A Battle of Adversaries
image: /img/written_digit.png
bigimg: /img/gan.jpg
tags: [GAN, PyTorch, Kaggle, Deep Learning]
comments: true
---
> The most interesting idea in the last ten years in Machine Learning. 

These were the words used by Yann LeCun, a very prominent researcher in the field of Deep Learning, to describe Generative Adversarial Networks (or GAN's, if you prefer). A GAN is basically two separate neural networks training in conjunction with each other, feeding off of each other, like adversaries, to create entirely new data. This data falls into the distribution of the data used to train this network, like say, creating an image of a horse from a zebra or vice-versa (an example of one of the several types of GAN's, a DCGAN).

A typical GAN consists of two parts, a generator, and a discriminator. The generator magically "generates" **new data** from white noise fed into it, and the job of the discriminator is to distinguish this generated data from the data in the original training set. While training this network, initially, the generator fares pretty poorly (it's expected of it to generate data from complete nonsense, so it's fair to cut it some slack). Still, as it receives feedback from the discriminator on the aspects to improve, eventually, after many epochs, it improves significantly. It manages to create new data with the same distribution as the original training data and fools the discriminator into thinking that it belongs to the initial training data!

A particularly apt and fun analogy used by Ian Goodfellow, the person who introduced this revolutionary concept in his groundbreaking [paper](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/5423-generative-adversarial-nets.pdf) was:
> The generative model can be thought of as analogous to a team of counterfeiters,
trying to produce fake currency and use it without detection, while the discriminative model is
analogous to the police, trying to detect the counterfeit currency. Competition in this game drives
both teams to improve their methods until the counterfeits are indistinguishable from the genuine
articles.

GAN's have been the subject of a lot of interest lately, with many people further developing this idea. To familiarise yourself further with this concept, I'd suggest reading [this article](https://medium.com/@jonathan_hui/gan-whats-generative-adversarial-networks-and-its-application-f39ed278ef09). Further, people have developed many cool applications of GAN's like generating faces of non-existent people complete with a range of emotions like happy, sad or angry! If you'd like to learn more about these applications, you can read [this](https://medium.com/@jonathan_hui/gan-some-cool-applications-of-gans-4c9ecca35900).

Personally, after reading the paper by Ian Goodfellow initially, I was a bit intimidated, but as it turned out, implementing one can be quite simple! There are plenty of tutorials online describing the creation of very simple GAN's in about 50 lines of code.

Armed with this background and a couple of hours of debugging later, I managed to create my first very own GAN from scratch! I trained it on the MNIST dataset (a dataset containing 70000 images of handwritten digits), and I must admit, I was quite pleased to see the results generated after only about 25 epochs! You can have a look at the complete code with the relevant implementation details in the Jupyter Notebook on [kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/tjac718/basic-gan-on-mnist-dataset-using-pytorch/data) or my [GitHub Repo](https://github.com/thomas-jac/GAN-On-MNIST-Dataset-Using-PyTorch). Training on a more significant number of epochs will produce much better results, and I will experiment with that at a later time.
